I got an excellent response from Joseph Wisniewski:

The five contact interface is actually 7 contacts wide, with a 2 contact gap. 
2 contacts are power and ground, three more are a serial data interface (clock, 
data, and read/write). They do pretty much what Bjorn said, communicate lens 
data back to the camera, and communicate commands like "start VR" to the lens.
-
The gap is because Nikon originally designed an entirely different AF system for 
the F3-AF. This system had 7 contacts, and a motor in the lens, and the camera 
would drive the lens motor through two high power contacts: "near to far" and 
"far to near". There was no serial communication, just power and limit switches. 
When Nikon made the new "screwdriver" system for the N2020 camera, they avoided 
using those two contacts, to keep old F3-AF cameras from frying the new "digital 
interface" lenses. Nikon F4 (aside from being the ugliest Nikon ever designed) 
actually had the circuitry to drive either the F3-AF lenses or the new AF Nikkors.
-
AF-S and AF-I lenses need 8 contacts to function properly. They add an additional 
high power line so that the lens motor could suck power directly from the camera 
battery. A pair of additional motion detection lines allow the camera to track 
the direction and speed of lens movement. Nikon "recycled" the contacts from the 
"gap" in the second AF system. This tracking function is only used by high end 
bodies like D2X, D3, F100, F5, so those bodies have 8 contacts. Lesser bodies like 
D100 or N80 have 7 contacts. I don't know about some of the newer low end bodies.
-
Although cameras have 7 or 8 contacts, Nikon AF-S (and older AF-I) lenses have 10 
contacts. Two of these are for use with teleconverters. AF-S teleconverters have 10 
contacts on the front (lens side), and 8 on the camera side. The two contacts let 
the converter send a "hi, I'm a 1.4x teleconverter" message to the lens. This 
allows the lens to send a "I'm not really a 105mm f2.8 macro, I'm really a 147mm 
f4 macro" to the camera. Even AF-S lenses that aren't normally used with teleconverters, 
like the 12-24mm f4 DX, have 10 pins, and often work properly on Kenko teleconverters.
-
I'm not sure why a lens would have 7 contacts, unless it's a low end AF-S lens designed 
only to exploit the features of a low end body, leaving off the motion detection. Which 
lenses have you seen with 7 contacts.

The contacts are identified in Nikon service manuals (and on the circuit boards of 
cameras and lenses) as "A" through "J". "A" is the leftmost contact as you gaze lovingly 
into the lens mount of the camera. The names of the contacts vary depending on what 
manual you read. E and F are the "gap" contacts in older cameras.The first F3-AF interface:
-
number
F3AF
A: VCC
B: Limit switch
C: Near to Far
D: Far to Near
E: 
F: Relative Distance
G: GND
-
The second AF interface, as used in 5 contact screwdriver lenses:
number
N50
patent
A: VCC,  LCVV
B: RW1,  RW1
C: SCK,  LCK
D: SIO,  LIO
E:
F:
G: DGND, PGND
-
The third AF interface, as used in cameras that support AF-S lenses:
number
N90, N70
F5
patent
A: LCVV, VCC,  LCVV
B: RW1,  R/W1, RW1
C: LCK,  SCK,  LCK
D: LIO,  SI/O, LIO
E: RW2,  R/W2, RW2
F: LBAT, LBAT, LBAT
G: PGND, GND,  PGND
-
The full 10 pins from the 300mm f2.8 AF-I service manual:
number
300mm
protection
A: VCC, cap to PGND
B: R/W1, pull up and series
C: Clock, series
D: DATA, pull up
E: Hotline, Pulse, pull up and series
F: Power for Motor
G: Motor GND
H: Hotline, Pulse, pull up and series
I: Reserve
J: Reserve
Mount: GND